LD__2022_CVPR__Localization_Distillation_for_Dense_Object_Detection.pdf
Localization Distillation for Dense Object Detection
Zhaohui Zheng1∗, Rongguang Ye 2*, Ping Wang 2, Dongwei Ren 3, Wangmeng Zuo 3,
Qibin Hou1†, Ming-Ming Cheng 1
1TMCC, CS, Nankai University 2School of Mathematics, Tianjin University
3School of Computer Science and Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
Abstract
Knowledge distillation (KD) has witnessed its powerful
capability in learning compact models in object detection.
Previous KD methods for object detection mostly focus on
imitating deep features within the imitation regions instead
of mimicking classification logit due to its inefficiency in
distilling localization information and trivial improvement.
In this paper, by reformulating the knowledge distillation
process on localization, we present a novel localization dis-
tillation (LD) method which can efficiently transfer the lo-
calization knowledge from the teacher to the student. More-
over, we also heuristically introduce the concept of valu-
able localization region that can aid to selectively distill the
semantic and localization knowledge for a certain region.
Combining these two new components, for the first time,
we show that logit mimicking can outperform feature imi-
tation and localization knowledge distillation is more im-
portant and efficient than semantic knowledge for distilling
object detectors. Our distillation scheme is simple as well
as effective and can be easily applied to different dense ob-
ject detectors. Experiments show that our LD can boost
the AP score of GFocal-ResNet-50 with a single-scale 1 ×
training schedule from 40.1 to 42.1 on the COCO bench-
mark without any sacrifice on the inference speed. Our
source code and pretrained models are publicly available
at https://github.com/HikariTJU/LD.
1. Introduction
Localization is a fundamental issue in object detection
[15, 24, 33, 49, 50, 55–57, 61, 68]. Bounding box regression
is the most popular manner so far for localization in ob-
ject detection [10,32,39,42], where Dirac delta distribution
representation is intuitive and popular for years. However,
localization ambiguity where objects cannot be confidently
located by their edges is still a common issue. For exam-
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
A B
(a) (b)
A B
(a) (b)
Figure 1. Bottom edge for “ elephant” and right edge for “ surf-
board” are ambiguous.
ple, as shown in Fig. 1, the bottom edge for “elephant”
and the right edge for “surfboard” are ambiguous to locate.
This issue is even worse for lightweight detectors. One way
to alleviate this problem is the knowledge distillation (KD),
which, as a model compression technology, has been widely
validated to be useful for boosting the performance of the
small-sized student network by transferring the generalized
knowledge captured by the large-sized teacher network.
Speaking of KD in object detection, previous works
[22, 52, 62] have pointed out that the original logit mimick-
ing technique [19] for classification is inefficient as it only
transfers the semantic knowledge (i.e., classification), while
neglects the importance of localization knowledge distilla-
tion. Therefore, existent KD methods for object detection
mostly focus on enforcing the consistency of the deep fea-
tures between the teacher-student pair, and exploit various
imitation regions for distillation [5, 8, 16, 25, 52]. Fig. 2
exhibits three popular KD pipelines for object detection.
However, as the semantic knowledge and the localization
one are mixed on the feature maps, it is hard to tell whether
it is beneficial to the performance to transfer the hybrid
knowledge for each location and which regions are con-
ducive to the transfer of a certain type of knowledge.
Motivated by the aforementioned questions, in this pa-
per, instead of simply distilling the hybrid knowledge on the
feature maps, we propose a novel divide-and-conquer dis-
tillation strategy that transfers the semantic and localization
knowledge separately. For semantic knowledge, we use the
9407

Teacher Network
Student Network
Logit Mimicking
Feature Map
Feature Map
Classification Head
Classification Head
Feature Imitation
Region Weighting
Region Weighting
Pseudo BBox 
Regression
Localization Head
Localization Head
Adaptive Layer
Figure 2. Existing KD pipelines for object detection. ① Logit
Mimicking: classification KD in [19]. ② Feature Imitation: recent
popular methods distill intermediate features based on various dis-
tillation regions, which usually need adaptive layers to align the
size of the student’s feature map. ③ Pseudo BBox Regression:
treating teachers’ predicted bounding boxes as additional regres-
sion targets.
original classification KD [19]. For localization knowledge,
we reformulate the knowledge transfer process on localiza-
tion and present a simple yet effective localization distilla-
tion (LD) method by switching the bounding box to proba-
bility distribution [28, 37]. This is quite different from pre-
vious works [5, 47] that treat the teacher’s outputs as addi-
tional regression targets (i.e., the Pseudo BBox Regression
in Fig. 2). Benefiting from the probability distribution rep-
resentation, our LD can efficiently transfer rich localization
knowledge learnt by the teacher to the student. In addi-
tion, based on the proposed divide-and-conquer distillation
strategy, we further introduce valuable localization region
(VLR) to help efficiently judge which regions are conducive
to classification or localization learning. Through a series
of experiments, we, for the first time, show that the origi-
nal logit mimicking can be better than feature imitation and
localization knowledge distillation is more important and
more efficient than semantic knowledge. We believe that
separately distilling the semantic and localization knowl-
edge based on their respective favorable regions could be
a promising way to train better object detectors.
Our method is simple and can be easily equipped with
in any dense object detectors to improve their performance
without introducing any inference overhead. Extensive
experiments on MS COCO show that without bells and
whistles, we can lift the AP score of the strong baseline
GFocal [28] with ResNet-50-FPN backbone from 40.1 to
42.1, and AP 75 from 43.1 to 45.6. Our best model using
ResNeXt-101-32x4d-DCN backbone can achieve a single-
scale test of 50.5 AP, which surpasses all existing detectors
under the same backbone, neck, and test settings.
2. Related Work
In this section, we give a brief review on the related
works, including bounding box regression, localization
quality estimation, and knowledge distillation.
2.1. Bounding Box Regression
Bounding box regression is the most popular method for
localization in object detection. R-CNN series [3,35,42,60]
adopt multiple regression stages to refine the detection re-
sults, while [2, 32, 39–41, 48] adopt one-stage regression.
In [43, 58, 64, 65], IoU-based loss functions are proposed to
improve the localization quality of bounding box. Recently,
bounding box representation has evolved from Dirac delta
distribution [32,39,42] to Gaussian distribution [7,18], and
further to probability distribution [28, 37]. The probability
distribution of bounding box is more comprehensive for de-
scribing the uncertainty of bounding box, and is validated to
be the most advanced bounding box representation so far.
2.2. Localization Quality Estimation
As the name suggests, Localization Quality Estimation
(LQE) predicts a score that measures the localization qual-
ity of the bounding box predicted by the detector. LQE
is usually used to cooperate with classification task dur-
ing training [27], i.e., enhancing the consistency between
classification and localization. It can also be applied in
joint decision-making during post-processing [21, 39, 48],
i.e., considering both classification score and LQE when
performing NMS. Early research can be dated to YOLOv1
[39], where the predicted object confidence is used to pe-
nalize the classification score. Then, box/mask IoU [20,21]
and box/polar center-ness [48, 53] are proposed to model
the uncertainty of detections for object detection and in-
stance segmentation, respectively. From the perspective of
bounding box representation, Softer-NMS [18] and Gaus-
sian YOLOv3 [7] predict variance for each edge of bound-
ing box. LQE is a preliminary approach to model localiza-
tion ambiguity.
2.3. Knowledge Distillation
Knowledge distillation [1, 19, 34, 36, 45, 59] aims to
learn compact and efficient student models guided by ex-
cellent teacher networks. FitNets [44] proposes to mimic
the intermediate-level hints from the hidden layers of the
teacher model. Knowledge distillation was first applied to
object detection in [5], where the hint learning and KD
are both used for multi-class object detection. Then, Li
et al. [25] proposed to mimic the feature within the re-
gion proposal for Faster R-CNN. Wang et al. [52] mim-
icked fine-grained features on close anchor box locations.
9408

Region 
Weighting
Teacher
Student
Probability Distribution
LD loss
Region Weighting
Localization Head
Region 
Weighting
: Main distillation region.
: Valuable localization region.
: Pixel-wise multiplication.
Figure 3. Illustration of localization distillation (LD) for an edge e ∈ B = {t, b, l, r}. Only the localization branch is visualized here.
S(·, τ) is the generalized SoftMax function with temperature τ. For a given detector, we first switch the bounding box representation
to probability distribution. Then, we determine where to distill via region weighting on the main distillation region and the valuable
localization region. Finally, we calculate the LD loss between two probability distributions predicted by the teacher and the student.
Recently, Dai et al. [8] introduced the General Instance Se-
lection Module to mimic deep features within the discrim-
inative patches between teacher-student pairs. DeFeat [16]
leverages different loss weights when conducting feature
imitation on the object regions and the background region.
Different from the aforementioned method based on feature
imitation, our work introduces localization distillation and
proposes to separately transfer the classification and local-
ization knowledge based on the valuable localization region
to make the distillation more efficient.
3. Proposed Method
In this section, we introduce the proposed distillation
method. Instead of distilling the hybrid knowledge on fea-
ture maps, we present a novel divide-and-conquer distilla-
tion strategy that separately distills the semantic and local-
ization knowledge based on their respective preferred re-
gions. To transfer the semantic knowledge, we simply adopt
the classification KD [19] on the classification head while
for localization knowledge, we propose a simple yet effec-
tive localization distillation (LD). Both techniques operate
on the logits of individual heads rather than deep features.
Then, to further improve the distillation efficiency, we intro-
duce valuable localization region (VLR) that can help judge
which type of knowledge is conducive to transfer for dif-
ferent regions. In what follows, we first briefly revisit the
probability distribution representation of bounding box and
then transit to the proposed method.
3.1. Preliminaries
For a given bounding box B, conventional representa-
tions have two forms, i.e., {x, y, w, h} (central point coor-
dinates, width and height) [32, 39, 42] and {t, b, l, r} (dis-
tance from the sampling point to the top, bottom, left and
right edges) [48]. These two forms actually follow the Dirac
delta distribution that only focuses on the ground-truth lo-
cations but cannot model the ambiguity of bounding boxes
as shown in Fig. 1. This is also clearly demonstrated in pre-
vious works [7, 18, 28, 37].
In our method, we use the recent probability distribu-
tion representation of bounding box [28, 37] which is more
comprehensive for describing the localization uncertainty
of bounding box. Let e ∈ B be an edge of a bounding box.
Its value can be generally represented as
ˆe =
Z emax
emin
x Pr(x)dx, e ∈ B , (1)
where x is the regression coordinate ranged in [emin, emax],
and Pr(x) is the corresponding probability. The con-
ventional Dirac delta representation is a special case of
Eqn. (1), where Pr(x) = 1 when x = egt, otherwise
Pr(x) = 0 . By quantizing the continuous regression
range [emin, emax] into the uniform discretized variable
e = [ e1, e2, · · · , en]T ∈ Rn with n subintervals, where
e1 = emin and en = emax, each edge of the given bound-
ing box can be represented as the probability distribution by
using the SoftMax function.
3.2. Localization Distillation
In this subsection, we present localization distillation
(LD), a new way to enhance the distillation efficiency for
object detection. Our LD is evolved from the view of prob-
ability distribution representation [28] of bounding box
which is originally designed for the generic object detection
and carries abundant localization information. The ambigu-
ous and clear edges in Fig. 1 will be respectively reflected
by the flatness and sharpness of distribution.
The working principle of our LD can be seen in Fig. 3.
Given an arbitrary dense object detector, following [28], we
first switch the bounding box representation from a quater-
nary representation to a probability distribution. We choose
9409


DKD__2022_CVPR__Decoupled_Knowledge_Distillation.pdf
Decoupled Knowledge Distillation
Borui Zhao1 Quan Cui2 Renjie Song1 Yiyu Qiu1,3 Jiajun Liang1
1MEGVII Technology 2Waseda University 3Tsinghua University
zhaoborui.gm@gmail.com, cui-quan@toki.waseda.jp,
chouyy18@mails.tsinghua.edu.cn, {songrenjie, liangjiajun }@megvii.com
Abstract
State-of-the-art distillation methods are mainly based on
distilling deep features from intermediate layers, while the
signiﬁcance of logit distillation is greatly overlooked. To
provide a novel viewpoint to study logit distillation, we re-
formulate the classical KD loss into two parts, i.e., target
class knowledge distillation (TCKD) and non-target class
knowledge distillation (NCKD). We empirically investigate
and prove the effects of the two parts: TCKD transfers
knowledge concerning the “difﬁculty” of training samples,
while NCKD is the prominent reason why logit distillation
works. More importantly, we reveal that the classical KD
loss is a coupled formulation, which (1) suppresses the ef-
fectiveness of NCKD and (2) limits the ﬂexibility to bal-
ance these two parts . To address these issues, we present
Decoupled Knowledge Distillation (DKD), enabling TCKD
and NCKD to play their roles more efﬁciently and ﬂexibly.
Compared with complex feature-based methods, our DKD
achieves comparable or even better results and has bet-
ter training efﬁciency on CIF AR-100, ImageNet, and MS-
COCO datasets for image classiﬁcation and object detec-
tion tasks. This paper proves the great potential of logit
distillation, and we hope it will be helpful for future re-
search. The code is available at https://github.com/megvii-
research/mdistiller.
1. Introduction
In the last decades, the computer vision ﬁeld has been
revolutionized by deep neural networks (DNN), which suc-
cessfully boost various real-scenario tasks, e.g., image clas-
siﬁcation [9, 13, 21], objection detection [ 8, 27], and seman-
tic segmentation [31,45]. However, powerful networks nor-
mally beneﬁt from large model capacities, introducing high
computational and storage costs. Such costs are not prefer-
able in industrial applications, where lightweight models
are widely deployed. In the literature, a potential direction
of cutting down the costs is knowledge distillation (KD).
target
Teacher
Student
KLLossKD
non-target
(a) Classical Knowledge Distillation (KD).
TeacherStudentTarget ClassKLLossTCKD+zNCKDNon-target Class KLLossDecoupling!"#$$%&#"'(=*!'(+,−./0∗2!'(('(345$=6∗*!'(+7∗2!'(
./0
./8
targetnon-target
(b) Decoupled Knowledge Distillation (DKD).
Figure 1. Illustration of the classical KD [ 12] and our DKD.W e
reformulate KD into a weighted sum of two parts, i.e., TCKD and
NCKD. The ﬁrst equation shows that KD (1) couples NCKD with
pT
t (the teacher’s conﬁdence on the target class), and (2) couples
the importance of two parts. Furthermore, we demonstrate that the
ﬁrst coupling suppresses the effectiveness, and the second limits
the ﬂexibility for knowledge transfer. We propose DKD to address
these issues, which employs hyper-parameters ↵ for TCKD and  
for NCKD, killing the two birds with one stone.
KD represents a series of methods concentrating on trans-
ferring knowledge from a heavy model (teacher) to a light
one (student), which can improve the light model’s perfor-
mance without introducing extra costs.
The concept of KD was ﬁrstly proposed in [ 12] to trans-
fer the knowledge via minimizing the KL-Divergence be-
tween prediction logits of teachers and students (Figure 1a).
Since [28], most of the research attention has been drawn to
distill knowledge from deep features of intermediate lay-
ers. Compared with logits-based methods, the performance
11953

of feature distillation is superior on various tasks, so re-
search on logit distillation has been barely touched. How-
ever, training costs of feature-based methods are unsatis-
factory, because extra computational and storage usage are
introduced (e.g., network modules and complex operations)
for distilling deep features during training time.
Logit distillation requires marginal computational and
storage costs, but the performance is inferior. Intuitively,
logit distillation should achieve comparable performance
as feature distillation, since logits are in higher semantic
level than deep features. We suppose that the potential of
logit distillation is limited by unknown reasons, causing
the unsatisfactory performance. To revitalize logits-based
methods, we start this work by delving into the mecha-
nism of KD. Firstly, we divide a classiﬁcation prediction
into two levels: (1) a binary prediction for the target class
and all the non-target classes and (2) a multi-category pre-
diction for each non-target class . Based on this, we refor-
mulate the classical KD loss [ 12] into two parts, as shown
in Figure 1b. One is a binary logit distillation for the tar-
get class and the other is a multi-category logit distilla-
tion for non-target classes. For simpliﬁcation, we respec-
tively name them as target classiﬁcation knowledge distil-
lation (TCKD) and non-target classiﬁcation knowledge dis-
tillation (NCKD). The reformulation allows us to study the
effects of the two parts independently.
TCKD transfers knowledge via binary logit distillation,
which means only the prediction of the target class is pro-
vided while the speciﬁc prediction of each non-target class
is unknown. A reasonable hypothesis is that TCKD trans-
fers knowledge about the “difﬁculty” of training samples,
i.e., the knowledge describes how difﬁcult it is to recog-
nize each training sample. To validate this, we design ex-
periments from three aspects to increase the “difﬁculty” of
training data, i.e., stronger augmentation, noisier label and
inherently challenging dataset.
NCKD only considers the knowledge among non-target
logits. Interestingly, we empirically prove that only ap-
plying NCKD achieves comparable or even better results
than the classical KD, indicating the vital importance of
knowledge contained in non-target logits, which could be
the prominent “dark knowledge”.
More importantly, our reformulation demonstrates that
the classical KD loss is a highly coupled formulation (as
shown in Figure 1b), which could be the reason why the po-
tential of logit distillation is limited. Firstly, the NCKD loss
term is weighted by a coefﬁcient that negatively correlates
with the teacher’s prediction conﬁdence on the target class.
Thus larger prediction scores would lead to smaller weights.
The coupling signiﬁcantly suppresses the effects of NCKD
on well-predicted training samples. Such suppression is not
preferable since the more conﬁdent the teacher is in the
training sample, the more reliable and valuable knowledge
it could provide . Secondly, the signiﬁcance of TCKD and
NCKD are coupled, i.e., weighting TCKD and NCKD sepa-
rately is not allowed. Such limitation is not preferable since
TCKD and NCKD should be separately considered since
their contributions are from different aspects.
To address these issues, we propose a ﬂexible and ef-
ﬁcient logit distillation method named Decoupled Knowl-
edge Distillation (DKD, Figure 1b). DKD decouples the
NCKD loss from the coefﬁcient negatively correlated with
the teacher’s conﬁdence by replacing it with a constant
value, improving the distillation effectiveness on well-
predicted samples. Meanwhile, NCKD and TCKD are also
decoupled so that their importance can be separately con-
sidered by adjusting the weight of each part.
Overall, our contributions are summarized as follows:
• We provide an insightful view to study logit distillation
by dividing the classical KD into TCKD and NCKD.
Additionally, the effects of both parts are respectively
analyzed and proved.
• We reveal limitations of the classical KD loss caused
by its highly coupled formulation. Coupling NCKD
with the teacher’s conﬁdence suppresses the effective-
ness of knowledge transfer. Coupling TCKD with
NCKD limits the ﬂexibility to balance the two parts.
• We propose an effective logit distillation method
named DKD to overcome these limitations. DKD
achieves state-of-the-art performances on various
tasks. We also empirically validate the higher train-
ing efﬁciency and better feature transferability of DKD
compared with feature-based distillation methods.
2. Related work
The concept of knowledge distillation (KD) was ﬁrstly
proposed by Hinton et al . in [ 12]. KD deﬁnes a learn-
ing manner where a bigger teacher network is employed to
guide the training of a smaller student network for many
tasks [ 12, 17, 18]. The “dark knowledge” is transferred to
students via soft labels from teachers. For raising the at-
tention on negative logits, the hyper-parameter temperature
was introduced. The following works can be divided into
two types, distillation from logits [ 3, 6, 22, 40, 44] and inter-
mediate features [ 10, 11, 14, 15, 23, 25, 28, 33, 34, 41, 43].
Previous works of logit distillation mainly focus on
proposing effective regularization and optimization meth-
ods rather than novel methods. DML [ 44] proposes a mu-
tual learning manner to train students and teachers simulta-
neously. TAKD [ 22] introduces an intermediate-sized net-
work named “teacher assistant” to bridge the gap between
teachers and students. Besides, several works also focus on
interpreting the classical KD method [ 2, 26].
State-of-the-art methods are mainly based on interme-
diate features, which can directly transfer representations
from the teacher to the student [ 10, 11, 28] or transfer the
11954

correlation between samples captured in the teacher to the
student [ 23, 33, 34]. Most of the feature-based methods
could achieve preferable performances (signiﬁcant higher
than logits-based methods), yet involving considerably high
computational and storage costs.
This paper focuses on analyzing what limits the potential
of logits-based methods and revitalizing logit distillation.
3. Rethinking Knowledge Distillation
In this section, we delve into the mechanism of knowl-
edge distillation. We reformulate KD loss into a weighted
sum of two parts, one is relevant to the target class, and the
other is not. We explore the effect of each part in the knowl-
edge distillation framework and reveal some limitations of
the classical KD. Inspired by the ﬁndings, we further pro-
pose a novel logit distillation method, achieving remarkable
performance on various tasks.
3.1. Reformulating KD
Notations. For a training sample from the t-th class,
the classiﬁcation probabilities can be denoted as p =
[p1,p 2,. . . ,pt,. . . ,pC ] 2 R1⇥C , where pi is the probabil-
ity of the i-th class and C is the number of classes. Each
element in p can be obtained by the softmax function:
pi = exp(zi)PC
j=1 exp(zj )
, (1)
where zi represents the logit of the i-th class.
To separate the predictions relevant and irrelevant to
the target class, we deﬁne the following notations. b =
[pt,p \t] 2 R1⇥2 represents the binary probabilities of the
target class ( pt) and all the other non-target classes ( p\t),
which can be calculated by:
pt = exp(zt)PC
j=1 exp(zj )
,p \t =
PC
k=1,k6=t exp(zk)
PC
j=1 exp(zj )
.
Meanwhile, we declare ˆp =[ ˆp1,. . . ,ˆpt 1, ˆpt+1,. . . ,ˆpC ] 2
R1⇥(C 1) to independently model probabilities among non-
target classes (i.e., without considering the t-th class). Each
element is calculated by:
ˆpi = exp(zi)PC
j=1,j6=t exp(zj )
. (2)
Reformulation. In this part1, we attempt to reformulate KD
with the binary probabilities b and the probabilities among
non-target classes ˆp. T and S denote the teacher and the
student, respectively. The classical KD uses KL-Divergence
as the loss function, which can be written as 2:
1More mathematical formulations are in the supplement.
2We omit the temperature (T) in [ 12] without loss of generality
KD = KL(pT ||pS )
= pT
t log( pT
t
pS
t
)+
CX
i=1,i6=t
pT
i log( pT
i
pS
i
). (3)
According to Eqn.( 1) and Eqn.( 2) we have ˆpi = pi/p\t, so
we can rewrite Eqn.( 3) as:
KD = pT
t log( pT
t
pS
t
)+ pT
\t
CX
i=1,i6=t
ˆpT
i (log( ˆpT
i
ˆpS
i
)+l o g (
pT
\t
pS
\t
))
= pT
t log( pT
t
pS
t
)+ pT
\t log(
pT
\t
pS
\t
)
| {z }
KL(bT ||bS )
+pT
\t
CX
i=1,i6=t
ˆpT
i log( ˆpT
i
ˆpS
i
)
| {z }
KL(ˆpT ||ˆpS )
.
(4)
Then, Eqn.(4) can be rewritten as:
KD = KL(bT ||bS )+( 1   pT
t )KL(ˆpT ||ˆpS ) (5)
As reﬂected by Eqn.( 5), the KD loss is reformulated
into a weighted sum of two terms. KL (bT ||bS ) repre-
sents the similarity between the teacher’s and student’s bi-
nary probabilities of the target class. Thus, we name it
Target Class Knowledge Distillation(TCKD). Meanwhile,
KL(ˆpT ||ˆpS ) represents the similarity between the teacher’s
and student’s probabilities among non-target classes, named
Non-Target Class Knowledge Distillation(NCKD). Eqn.( 5)
could be rewritten as:
KD = TCKD +( 1   pT
t )NCKD. (6)
Obviously, the weight of NCKD is coupled with pT
t .
The reformulation above inspires us to investigate the in-
dividual effects of TCKD and NCKD, which will reveal the
limitations of the classical coupled formulation.
3.2. Effects of TCKD and NCKD
Performance gain of each part. We individually study the
effects of TCKD and NCKD on CIFAR-100 [ 16]. ResNet
[9], WideResNet (WRN) [ 42] and ShufﬂeNet [ 21] are se-
lected as training models, among which both the same and
different architectures are considered. The experimental re-
sults are reported in Table 1. For each teacher-student pair,
we report the results of (1) the student baseline (vanilla
training), (2) the classical KD (where TCKD and NCKD
are both used), (3) singly TCKD and (4) singly NCKD. The
weight of each loss is set as 1.0 (including the default cross-
entropy loss). Other implementation details are the same as
those in Sec 4.
Intuitively, TCKD concentrates on the knowledge related
to the target class since the corresponding loss function con-
siders only binary probabilities. Conversely, NCKD focuses
on the knowledge among non-target classes. We notice that
11955


CrossKD__2024_CVPR__Cross_Head_KD_for_Object_Detection.pdf
CrossKD: Cross-Head Knowledge Distillation for Object Detection
Jiabao Wang1*, Yuming Chen1∗, Zhaohui Zheng1, Xiang Li2,1, Ming-Ming Cheng2,1, Qibin Hou2,1†
1VCIP, College of Computer Science, Nankai University
2NKIARI, Shenzhen Futian
https://github.com/jbwang1997/CrossKD
Abstract
Knowledge Distillation (KD) has been validated as an
effective model compression technique for learning com-
pact object detectors. Existing state-of-the-art KD methods
for object detection are mostly based on feature imitation.
In this paper, we present a general and effective prediction
mimicking distillation scheme, called CrossKD, which de-
livers the intermediate features of the student’s detection
head to the teacher’s detection head. The resulting cross-
head predictions are then forced to mimic the teacher’s pre-
dictions. This manner relieves the student’s head from re-
ceiving contradictory supervision signals from the annota-
tions and the teacher’s predictions, greatly improving the
student’s detection performance. Moreover, as mimicking
the teacher’s predictions is the target of KD, CrossKD of-
fers more task-oriented information in contrast with feature
imitation. On MS COCO, with only prediction mimicking
losses applied, our CrossKD boosts the average precision
of GFL ResNet-50 with 1 × training schedule from 40.2 to
43.7, outperforming all existing KD methods. In addition,
our method also works well when distilling detectors with
heterogeneous backbones.
1. Introduction
Knowledge Distillation (KD), serving as a model compres-
sion technique, has been deeply studied in object detec-
tion [5, 13, 29, 31, 56, 60, 61, 74, 75] and has received
excellent performance recently. According to the distil-
lation position of the detectors, existing KD methods can
be roughly classified into two categories: prediction mim-
icking and feature imitation. Prediction mimicking (See
Fig. 1(a)) was first proposed in [24], which points out that
the smooth distribution of the teacher’s predictions is more
comfortable for the student to learn than the Dirac distribu-
*Equal contribution.
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1. Comparisons between conventional KD methods and
our CrossKD. Rather than explicitly enforcing the consistency
between the intermediate feature maps or the predictions of the
teacher-student pair, CrossKD implicitly builds the connection be-
tween the heads of the teacher-student pair to improve the distilla-
tion efficiency.
tion of the ground truths. In other words, prediction mim-
icking forces the student to resemble the prediction distri-
bution of the teacher. Differently, feature imitation (See
Fig. 1(b)) follows the idea proposed in FitNet [54], which
argues that intermediate features contain more information
than the predictions from the teacher. It aims to enforce the
feature consistency between the teacher-student pair.
Prediction mimicking plays a vital role in distilling ob-
ject detection models. However, it has been observed to be
inefficient than feature imitation for a long time. Recently,
Zheng et al. [74] proposed a localization distillation (LD)
method that improves prediction mimicking by transferring
localization knowledge, which pushes the prediction mim-
icking to a new level. Despite just catching up with the ad-
vanced feature imitation methods, e.g., PKD [5], LD shows
that prediction mimicking has the ability to transfer task-
arXiv:2306.11369v2  [cs.CV]  15 Apr 2024
(a) 
ground
-
truth
(c)
prediction mimicking
(b) teacher predictions
(d) 
CrossKD
0.00
0.50
1.00
Figure 2. Visualizations of the classification predictions from the GFL [35]. (a) and (b) are ground truth and distillation targets. (c) and (d)
are the classification outputs predicted by models training with conventional prediction mimicking and proposed CrossKD. In the green
circled areas, the distillation targets predicted by the teacher have a large discrepancy with the ground-truth targets assigned to the student.
prediction mimicking forces the student to mimic the teacher, while CrossKD can smooth the mimicking process.
specific knowledge, which benefits the student from the or-
thogonal aspect to feature imitation. This motivates us to
further explore and improve prediction mimicking.
Through investigation, we observe that conventional pre-
diction mimicking may suffer from a conflict between the
ground-truth targets from the student’s assigner and the dis-
tillation targets predicted from the teacher. When train-
ing a detector with prediction mimicking, the student’s pre-
dictions are forced to mimic both the ground-truth targets
and the teacher’s predictions simultaneously. However, the
distillation targets predicted by the teacher usually have
a large discrepancy with the ground-truth targets assigned
to the student. As shown in Fig. 2(a) and Fig. 2(b), the
teacher produces class probabilities in the green circled ar-
eas, which conflicts with the ground-truth targets assigned
to the student. As a result, the student detector experiences
a contradictory learning process during distillation, which
seriously interferes with optimization.
To alleviate the above conflict, previous prediction mim-
icking methods [13, 19, 74] tend to conduct the distillation
within regions containing mediate teacher-student discrep-
ancies. However, we argue that the heavily uncertain re-
gions generally accommodate more information that is ben-
eficial to the student. In this paper, we present a novel
cross-head knowledge distillation pipeline, abbreviated as
CrossKD. As illustrated in Fig. 1(c), We propose to feed the
intermediate features from the head of the student to that of
the teacher, yielding the cross-head predictions. Then, the
KD operations can be conducted between the new cross-
head predictions and the teacher’s predictions.
Despite its simplicity, CrossKD offers the following two
main advantages. First, since both the cross-head predic-
tions and the teacher’s predictions are produced by sharing
part of the teacher’s detection head, the cross-head predic-
tions are relatively consistent with the teacher’s predictions.
This relieves the discrepancy between the teacher-student
pair and enhances the training stability of prediction mim-
icking. In addition, as mimicking the teacher’s predictions
is the target of KD, CrossKD is theoretically optimal and
can offer more task-oriented information compared with
feature imitation. Both advantages enable our CrossKD to
efficiently distill knowledge from the teacher’s predictions
and hence result in even better performance than previous
state-of-the-art feature imitation methods.
Without bells and whistles, our method can significantly
boost the performance of the student detector, achieving a
faster training convergence. Comprehensive experiments on
the COCO [40] dataset are conducted in this paper to elabo-
rate the effectiveness of CrossKD. Specifically, with only
prediction mimicking losses applied, CrossKD achieves
43.7 AP on GFL with 1 × training schedule, which is 3.5
AP higher than the baseline, surpassing all previous state-
of-the-art object detection KD methods. Moreover, exper-
iments also indicate our CrossKD is orthogonal to feature
imitation methods. By combining CrossKD with the state-
of-the-art feature imitation method, like PKD [5], we fur-
ther achieve 43.9 AP on GFL. Furthermore, we also show
that our method can be used to distill detectors with hetero-
geneous backbones and performs better than other methods.
2. Related Work
2.1. Object Detection
Object detection is one of the most fundamental computer
vision tasks, which requires recognizing and localizing ob-
jects simultaneously. Modern object detectors can be briefly
divided into two categories: one-stage [3, 10, 11, 35, 39,
51, 57, 70] detectors and two-stage [8, 17, 18, 20, 21,
38, 52, 58, 73] detectors. Among them, one-stage detec-
tors, also known as dense detectors, have emerged as the
mainstream trend in detection due to their excellent speed-
accuracy trade-off.
Dense object detectors have received great attention
since YOLOv1 [49]. Typically, YOLO series detectors [2,
16, 44, 49–51] attempt to balance the model size and their
accuracy to meet the requirement of real-world applica-
tions. Anchor-free detectors [27, 57, 76] attempt to dis-
card the design of anchor boxes to avoid time-consuming
box operations and cumbersome hyper-parameter tuning.
Dynamic label assignment methods [15, 47, 70] are pro-
posed to better define the positive and negative samples
for model learning. GFL [34, 35] introduces Quality Fo-
cal Loss (QFL) and a Distribution-Guided Quality Pre-
dictor to increase the consistency between the classifica-
tion score and the localization quality. It also models the
bounding box representation as a probability distribution
so that it can capture the localization ambiguity of the box
edges. Recently, attributing to the strong ability of the trans-
former block to encode expressive features, DETR fam-
ily [4, 6, 30, 42, 45, 68, 77] has become a new trend in
the object detection community.
2.2. Knowledge Distillation for Object Detection
Knowledge Distillation (KD) is an effective technique to
transfer knowledge from a large-scale teacher model to a
small-scale student model. It has been widely studied in
the classification task [12, 23, 26, 36, 37, 46, 48, 54, 63,
67, 71, 72], but it is still challenging to distill detection
models because of the extreme background ratio. The pi-
oneer work [7] proposes the first distillation framework
for object detection by simply combining feature imitation
and prediction mimicking. Since then, feature imitation
has attracted more and more research attention. Typically,
some works [13, 25, 33, 61] focus on selecting effective
distillation regions for better feature imitation, while other
works [19, 31, 75] aim to weight the imitation loss better.
There are also methods [5, 65, 66, 69] attempting to de-
sign new teacher-student consistency functions, aiming to
explore more consistency information or release the strict
limit of the MSE loss.
As the earliest distillation strategy proposed in [24], pre-
diction mimicking plays a vital role in classification distilla-
tion. Recently, some improved prediction mimicking meth-
ods have been proposed to adapt to object detection. For
example, Rank Mimicking [31] regards the score rank of
the teacher as a kind of knowledge and aims to force the
student to rank instances as the teacher. LD [74] proposes
to distill the localization distribution of bounding box [35]
to transfer localization knowledge. In this paper, we con-
struct a CrossKD pipeline which separates detection and
distillation into different heads to alleviate the target con-
flict problem of prediction mimicking. It’s worth noting
that HEAD [59] delivers the student features to an indepen-
dent assistant head to bridge the gap between heterogeneous
teacher-student pairs. In contrast, we observe that sim-
ply delivering the student feature to the teacher is effective
enough to achieve SOTA results. This makes our method
quite concise and different from HEAD. Our method is also
related to [1, 28, 32, 64], but all of them aim to distill clas-
sification models and are not tailored for object detection.
/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000014/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000015/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000016/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000017/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000018
/uni00000037/uni0000004b/uni00000055/uni00000048/uni00000056/uni0000004b/uni00000052/uni0000004f/uni00000047
/uni00000013/uni00000011/uni00000018
/uni00000014/uni00000011/uni00000013/uni00000035/uni00000048/uni00000057/uni0000004c/uni00000051/uni00000044/uni00000031/uni00000048/uni00000057/uni00000024 /uni00000037/uni00000036/uni00000036/uni0000002a/uni00000029/uni0000002f
Figure 3. Statistics of the target conflict degree between stu-
dent (GFL-R50) and teacher (GFL-R101, ATSS-R101, RetinaNet-
R101). X-axis is the teacher-student discrepancy threshold for
conflict areas. Y-axis represents the ratios of the target conflict
areas to the positive areas.
3. Methodology
3.1. Analysis of the Target Conflict Problem
Target conflict is a common issue confronted in conven-
tional prediction mimicking methods. In contrast to the
classification task, which assigns a specific category to ev-
ery image, the labels in advanced detectors are usually dy-
namically assigned and not deterministic. Typically, detec-
tors depend on a hand-crafted principle, i.e., assigner, to
determine the label in each location. In most cases, detec-
tors cannot reproduce the assigner’s labels exactly, which
results in a conflict between the teacher-student targets in
KD. Furthermore, the inconsistency of the assigners of the
student and teacher in real-world scenarios extends the dis-
tance between the ground-truth and distillation targets.
To quantitatively measure the degree of target conflict,
we statistic the ratios of conflict areas to the positive areas
under different teacher-student discrepancy in the COCO
minival dataset and report the results in Fig. 3. As we can
see, even if both the teacher (ATSS [70] and GFL [35])
and student (GFL) have the same label assignment strategy,
there are still numerous locations that have a discrepancy
larger than 0.5 between the ground-truth and distillation tar-
gets, respectively. When we use a teacher with a different
assigner (RetinaNet) to distill the student (GFL), the con-
flict areas increases by a large margin. More experiments
in Sec. 4.5 also demonstrate that the target conflict problem
severely hinders the performance of prediction mimicking.
Despite the large influence of target conflict, this prob-
lem has been neglected for a long time in previous predic-
tion mimicking methods [24, 31]. These methods intend
to directly minimize the discrepancy between the teacher-
student predictions. Its objective can be described as:
LKD = 1
|S|
X
r∈R
S(r)Dpred(ps(r), pt(r)), (1)
where ps and pt are the prediction vectors generated by the
detection heads of the student and the teacher, respectively.